JUDY WOODRUFF: Much of the
president's agenda is aimed at
kicking the economy into higher
gear and creating more jobs.
Just four months into office,
the president has made numerous
claims about the jobs he's
created and the jobs he's saved.
He's in Wisconsin tonight,
and is spending a good part
of his week promoting some of
his
job-creating initiatives.
But what's the real record on
some of the president's claims?
William Brangham takes a
look behind the numbers.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Today,
the president repeated
a claim he's been making
for months: His policies
are creating new jobs that
far surpass his predecessors.
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States: I think probably
seldom has any president
and administration done more or
had more success so early on,
including a record number of
resolutions to eliminate
job-killing regulations.
And we see it all over the
country, where jobs are starting
that would never have started,
ever, under any circumstance.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Earlier this
month, the president claimed
he helped claim more than
one million new jobs.
DONALD TRUMP: More than a
million private sector jobs.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: But that
number was based on an estimate
from a payroll company.
The U.S. Labor Department
reported far fewer jobs.
This weekend, the president
correctly tweeted out a
lower number, 600,000.
STEVEN RATTNER, Former Adviser
to President Obama: In my 40
years of being in and around
Washington and economic policy,
I have never seen a president
try to take credit for as
many things as he has
tried to take credit
for on the job front.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Steve Rattner
is an analyst and Wall Street
financier who also headed
President Obama's Auto
Industry Task Force.
According to the Bureau of
Labor Statistics, in the four
months before President Trump's
election, the U.S. economy
added about 840,000 jobs.
In the four months since
his inauguration, it's
added about 600,000.
STEVEN RATTNER: The U.S. economy
is like a huge battleship.
It doesn't turn fast.
And so I think to judge any
president by a few months of
results, whether they're good
or bad, is way premature.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Veronique de
Rugy, a libertarian economist
at George Mason University, says
giving credit to a president
for job numbers, good
or bad, is misleading.
VERONIQUE DE RUGY, George
Mason University: It's wrong
to be thinking about the power
of the president
in terms of jobs.
What is important to think is
how -- what kind of policies
can be put in place to grow
the economy, and that,
in theory, creates jobs.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Since
he was elected, the
president claims he's
persuaded numerous companies
to keep and grow jobs here
in the U.S., but analysts who
have looked at these numbers
say they're not nearly as
clear-cut as the president says.
Take the president's claim back
in December that the heating
and cooling companies United
Technologies and Carrier would
be keeping jobs in the U.S.
and not sending them to Mexico.
DONALD TRUMP: I will tell you
that United Technologies and
Carrier stepped it up, and
now they're keeping -- actually,
the number is over 1,100
people, which is so great, which
is so good.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: CEO Greg
Hayes told CNBC that a personal
phone call from the president
and his business-friendly
platform were important factors.
GREGORY HAYES, CEO, United
Technologies: And he simply
said, "Look, Greg, I need you to
re-look at the decision
to close the Indianapolis
factory of Carrier."
He said, "We're going to do a
lot of things in this country
that is going to make it a
lot more conducive
to manufacturing."
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: It turned
out, though, only 800 jobs were
staying in the U.S., while 1,300
were in fact
leaving the country.
And those jobs that were staying
came after the company received
$7 million in tax incentives
from the state of Indiana.
Another example, just a few
weeks before the inauguration,
Ford Motor Company announced
they had scrapped plans
for a new billion-dollar
plant in Mexico.
The president hailed
the decision, but Ford's
then CEO, Mark Fields,
later said not moving
to Mexico was mostly
a business decision.
MARK FIELDS, Former CEO, Ford
Motor Company: Well, the main
reason for not building the
plant and canceling the
plant in Mexico is just
due to market demand.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: For critics
of the president, like Steven
Rattner, these claims are P.R.
stunts to give the
appearance of action.
STEVEN RATTNER: My colleague
and I recently put together
a list for The New York Times
of every place he
had taken credit.
And, in fact, he doesn't
deserve credit for any of them.
The only jobs that he
can legitimately take
credit for saving were
those 800 jobs at Carrier
Corporation early in
the administration.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: In one case,
the Trump administration's
claim about job creation
has blurred job categories.
SCOTT PRUITT, Environmental
Protection Agency Administrator:
Since the last -- fourth quarter
of last year until most
recently, added almost 50,000
jobs in the coal sector.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Last weekend,
EPA Administrator Scott Pruitt
made this striking claim, that
50,000 new coal jobs have been
created, which would mean the
entire U.S. coal industry had
doubled in just a few
Months.
fact-checkers quickly pointed
out that the vast majority
of those new jobs were not in
coal, but in mining.
In other interviews, Pruitt
included both categories
in the 50,000 number.
SCOTT PRUITT: You know, since
last -- the fourth quarter
of 2016, Chris, we have had
almost 50,000 jobs created in
the mining and - - and -- and
coal sector alone, in fact,
in the month of May,
almost 7,000 jobs.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Despite these
claims, many economists say
that, until the president's
major economic policies on
taxes, regulation and trade
are in place, they can't make a
proper verdict on
his job creation.
VERONIQUE DE RUGY: If you look
at the stock market, there
is just a lot of excitement
out there.
The question is whether they're
going to be able to translate
these into realities, which
then turns into real economic
growth that is based on
something else but hope.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The White
House is planning on hosting
another set of CEOs later this
week.
For the "PBS NewsHour,"
I'm William Brangham.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we're
going to continue to
follow the jobs story.